[New Concept]: Union Type (#472)
exercism/crystal: concepts/union-type/about.md

# Union types

Crystal allows for a variable to consist of multiple types.
This is called a [union type][union-type].

> In Crystal is it quite often a union type inferred by the compiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Crystal it is quite common for a union type to be inferred by the compiler.
```

```exercism/note

> A union type even if it consists of multiple types is still a single type at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A union type, even if it consists of multiple types, is still a single type at runtime.
```

> Meaning a union type is built of String and Int32 so will it not be both at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Meaning a union type is built of String and Int32 so it will not be both at the same time.
```

> Instead it will be either a String or an Int32.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, it will be either a String or an Int32.
```

```

A union type is declared by separating the types with a pipe (`|`).
They are often placed in parenthesis, but it is not required.

> The most common union type is `(T | Nil)` where `T` is a type, which can occur when doing methods that can return `Nil`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common union type is `(T | Nil)` where `T` is a type, which can occur in methods that can return `Nil`.
```

> This behavior is also known as a variable being **nilable**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is also known as a variable being **nilable**.
```

```crystal
a : String = "Hello"
a = nil # Error: type must be String, not (String | Nil)

a : (String | Nil) = "Hello"
a = nil
```

It is not limited to just 2 types, but can be as many as you want.

```crystal
a : (String | Int32 | Nil | Float64) = "Hello"
a = 1
a = nil
a = 1.0
```

## `typeof` vs `Object#class`

There are 2 ways to get the type of a variable.
Either by using [`typeof`][typeof] or by using [`Object#class`][Object#class].

> The difference between them is that typeof will return a variables type at compile time, while `Object#class` will return the type at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The difference between them is that `typeof` will return a variables type at compile time, while `Object#class` will return the type at runtime.
```

> Meaning if you want to for example see if a variable is a union type, then will `Object#class` not be able to tell you that, as it will only return the type at runtime, which is a single type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Meaning if you want to for example see if a variable is a union type, then `Object#class` will not be able to tell you that as it will only return the type at runtime, which is a single type.
```

```crystal
a : (String | Int32) = "Hello"
typeof(a) # => (String | Int32)
a.class # => String
```

## Operations on union types

> As a union type is a single type at runtime, so does all the normal operations work on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a union type is a single type at runtime, all the normal operations work on it.
```

But when compiling the code will the compiler not know which type it is.

> Thereby the code has to be setup in such a way that it can only be one of the types, when wanting to use the type specific operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thereby the code has to be setup in such a way that it can only be one of the types when wanting to use the type specific operations.
```

```crystal
a : (String | Int32) = "Hello"
a.downcase # Error: undefined method 'downcase' for (String | Int32)
```

> Crystal does have a special method for union types, which is the `is_a?` method, which takes a type as an argument and returns a boolean.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Crystal does have a special method for union types: the `is_a?` method, which takes a type as an argument and returns a boolean.
```

The `nil?` method is a shortcut for `is_a?(Nil)`.

> Putting the `is_a?` method in an control expression will make the compiler know which type it is, and thereby guaranteed that it is that type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Putting the `is_a?` method in an control expression will make the compiler know which type it is, and thereby guarantee that it is that type.
```

> And for an else branch will it be guaranteed that it is not that type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And for an else branch it will be guaranteed that it is not that type.
```

```crystal
a : (String | Int32) = "Hello"
if a.is_a?(String)
  typeof(a) # => String
  a.downcase # => "hello"
end
```

This `is_a?` is not limited to having just a single type as an argument, but can have a union type as an argument.
And can also be combined with `&&` to allow for multiple types.

```exercism/note

> The `is_a?` method when using it in conjunction with an control expression can't be an instance variable or class variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `is_a?` method when using it in conjunction with a control expression can't be an instance variable or class variable.
```

Instead these have to be assigned to a local variable first.
```

## as

One way of making a union type into a single type is by making so a branch can only be entered if the type is a specific type.
Another approach is to use the [`as`][as] method.

> Which will make a union type into a single type, by doing a runtime check, if the type is not the expected type, then will it raise an exception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will make a union type into a single type by doing a runtime check.
If the type is not the expected type, it will raise an exception.
```

```crystal
a : String | Int32 = "Hello"
a.as(String).downcase # => "hello"

a.as(Int32) # Error: can't cast String to Int32
```

```exercism/caution
This approach is only meant if you are sure that the type is the expected type, or if you want to raise an exception if it is not.

> Using this approach with not a proper setup can lead to unexpected behavior.

Reviewer: By this do you mean to say that when the type is incorrect it will raise an exception?

> Using this approach with not a proper setup can lead to unexpected behavior.

Author: I mean that if you for example have a user input and they input something you do not really handle before reaching this statement. Then it is another type than it should and suddenly your application starts throwing errors.

```

## as?

> [`as?`][as?] works very similar to `as`, but instead of raising an exception if the type is not the expected type, then will it return `nil`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`as?`][as?] works very similarly to `as`, but instead of raising an exception if the type is not the expected type, it will return `nil`.
```

> Which means that it will return a union type, of the type it is expected to be, and `Nil`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that it will return a union type of the expected type and `Nil`.
```

```crystal
a : (String | Int32) = "Hello"
a.as?(String).downcase # => "hello"

a.as?(Int32) # => nil
```

## Nilable shorthand

Nilable means that a variable can be either a type or `Nil`.
This can be written as `(T | Nil)`.

> But since Nilable types is rather common is there a shorthand for it, which is `T?`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But since Nilable types are rather common, there is a shorthand for it: `T?`.
```

```crystal
a : (String | Nil) = "Hello"
a = nil

a : String? = "Hello"
a = nil
```

## Inferring union types

The compiler will infer a union type if it is not sure which type it is.

> For example in the following code will the compiler not know which type `a` is, as it can be either a `String` or an `Int32`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in the following code the compiler will not know which type `a` is since it can be either a `String` or an `Int32`.
```

```crystal
if true
  a = 1
else
  a = "Hello"
end

p typeof(a) # => (Int32 | String)
```

> This inference is happening automatically, and there is other scenarios where for example a method can return a union type so will the compiler infer it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This inference happens automatically, and there are other scenarios where, for example, the compiler will infer that a method returns a union type.
```

# Union types

Crystal allows for a variable to consist of multiple types.
This is called a [union type][union-type].
In Crystal it is quite common for a union type to be inferred by the compiler.

```exercism/note
A union type, even if it consists of multiple types, is still a single type at runtime.
Meaning a union type is built of String and Int32 so it will not be both at the same time.
Instead, it will be either a String or an Int32.
```

A union type is declared by separating the types with a pipe (`|`).
They are often placed in parenthesis, but it is not required.
The most common union type is `(T | Nil)` where `T` is a type, which can occur in methods that can return `Nil`.
This is also known as a variable being **nilable**.

```crystal
a : String = "Hello"
a = nil # Error: type must be String, not (String | Nil)

a : (String | Nil) = "Hello"
a = nil
```

It is not limited to just 2 types, but can be as many as you want.

```crystal
a : (String | Int32 | Nil | Float64) = "Hello"
a = 1
a = nil
a = 1.0
```

## `typeof` vs `Object#class`

There are 2 ways to get the type of a variable.
Either by using [`typeof`][typeof] or by using [`Object#class`][Object#class].

> The difference between them is that `typeof` will return a variables type at compile time, while `Object#class` will return the type at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The difference between them is that `typeof` will return a variable's type at compile time, while `Object#class` will return the type at runtime.
```
